>> Sreenivasan: CURRENTLY, 30
STATES HAVE LAWS THAT ALLOW
GEOGRAPHIC COMMUNITIES TO BREAK
AWAY FROM LARGE PUBLIC SCHOOL
DISTRICTS AND FORM THEIR OWN.
AS A RESULT, A GROWING NUMBER OF
PREDOMINANTLY WHITE,
MIDDLE-CLASS NEIGHBORHOODS ARE
DOING JUST THAT AND TAKING THEIR
LOCAL PROPERTY TAXES WITH THEM.
THAT MAKES RACIAL AND ECONOMIC
DISPARITIES IN ADJACENT SCHOOL
DISTRICTS EVEN WORSE.
ALMOST 50 COMMUNITIES HAVE
SECEDED SINCE THE YEAR 2000,
ACCORDING TO THE NONPROFIT ED
BILL, AND A STORY THIS WEEK IN
"U.S. NEWS AND WORLD REPORT."
U.S. NEWS EDUCATION REPORTER
LAUREN CAMERA WROTE THAT STORY,
JOINS ME NOW FROM WASHINGTON.
LAUREN, LET'S JUST BREAK DOWN
HOW SECESSION OF A SCHOOL
DISTRICT WORKS.
YOU TOOK A LOOK AT A STORY IN
ALABAMA.
>> THIS RECENTLY CAME TO LIGHT
WHEN A SCHOOL DISTRICT IN
ALABAMA, JEFFERSON COUNTY SCHOOL
DISTRICT, WHICH INCLUDES
BIRMINGHAM, A COMMUNITY THERE
WHICH IS MAJORITY WHITE AND
MIDDLE-CLASS.
IT'S CALLED GARDENDALE, AND, FOR
A WHILE, THEY HAVE BEEN WANTING
TO SPLINTER OFF UNDER THE GUISE
OF CONTROLLING MORE OF THEIR
LOCAL PROPERTY TAXES, WHICH, OF
COURSE, MAKE UP THE BULK OF ANY
SCHOOL'S BUDGET.
AND AS YOU MENTIONED IN YOUR
INTRODUCTION, HARI, THIS IS
ACTUALLY LEGAL IN 30 STATES.
THERE ARE POLICIES ON THE BOOKS
ALLOWING COMMUNITIES TO DO THIS
IF THEY SO WISH.
AND, ACTUALLY, YOU KNOW, IT'S
NOT JUST IN ALABAMA.
WE'RE SEEING THIS HAPPEN ACROSS
THE ENTIRE COUNTRY.
SINCE 2000, MORE THAN 70
COMMUNITIES HAVE TRIED TO DO
THIS.
47 HAVE SUCCEEDED.
>> Sreenivasan: I'M ASSUMING
THAT THE RATIONALE BEHIND IT IS,
"HEY, WE WANT TO KEEP OUR
SCHOOLS GREAT.
WE ARE POURING ALL OF OUR
PROPERTY TAX INTO IT.
WE WANT TO KEEP THIS AROUND
WHERE OUR KIDS ARE ACTUALLY
GOING TO BENEFIT FROM IT."
BUT THERE'S A FLIP SIDE TO THAT.
>> YEAH, ABSOLUTELY.
WHEN A COMMUNITY THAT IS
WEALTHIER OR HAS HIGHER PROPERTY
TAX RATES, WHEN THEY SPLINTER
OFF FROM THEIR LARGER SCHOOL
DISTRICT, THAT CREATES THIS
FINANCIAL HOLE IN THE SCHOOL
DISTRICT THAT THEY LEAVE BEHIND.
YOU KNOW, IN EDUCATION POLICY,
WE TALK A LOT ABOUT SUBGROUP
PERFORMANCE AND ACHIEVEMENT
GAPS, AND A LOT OF TIMES THAT
FOCUSES ON THE DIFFERENCE
BETWEEN STUDENTS OF COLOR AND
WHITE STUDENTS, FOR EXAMPLE.
BUT REALLY THE FASTEST GROWING
GAP IS BETWEEN SOCIOECONOMIC
INDICATORS.
SO, POOR STUDENTS AND THEIR
WEALTHIER PEERS, THAT IS THE
FASTEST GROWING GAP IN THE U.S.
TODAY.
>> Sreenivasan: YOU POINT OUT
THAT THERE'S NINE ACTIVE
SECESSION EFFORTS THAT ARE
HAPPENING.
I'M JUST GOING TO RATTLE OFF
THIS LIST ACROSS THE U.S.:
ALABAMA, CALIFORNIA, GEORGIA,
LOUISIANA, NORTH CAROLINA,
TENNESSEE, VERMONT, AND
WISCONSIN.
SO, DO THESE STATES, OF THE 30
THAT ALLOW FOR THIS, HAVE TO
STUDY ANY SORT OF POTENTIAL
IMPACT, WHAT HAPPENS WHEN A
SECESSION OCCURS TO THOSE
SURROUNDING SCHOOL DISTRICTS?
>> ONLY A HANDFUL ACTUALLY
REQUIRE THAT THE DISTRICT LOOK
INTO THE IMPACT OF THE... THE
RACIAL IMPACT, THE SOCIOECONOMIC
IMPACT AND THE FINANCIAL IMPACT
OF THE COMMUNITIES SPLINTERING
OFF.
IN TENNESSEE, FOR EXAMPLE, THE
ONLY THING THAT THEY REQUIRE FOR
A COMMUNITY TO SPLINTER OFF IS
THAT THE MUNICIPALITY MUST HAVE
MORE THAN 1,500 STUDENTS.
AND, ALSO, THE MAJORITY OF THE
RESIDENTS IN THE MUNICIPALITY
THAT WANTS TO SPLINTER OFF, THEY
MUST AGREE WITH THAT MOVE.
SO, THAT MEANS THEY'RE NOT
TAKING INTO ACCOUNT ANYONE, ANY
OF THE RESIDENTS WHO LIVE IN THE
LARGER SCHOOL DISTRICT THAT
THEY'RE SPLINTERING OFF FROM.
>> Sreenivasan: LAUREN CAMERA,
THANKS SO MUCH FOR JOINING US.
>> THANKS FOR HAVING ME.